<center><h1>Revolutionizing Addiction Treatment</h1></center>

“It’s a revolution dammit! We’re going to have to offend somebody.” – The
character of John Adams, 1776 (movie)

There’s a lot right about the current situation in addiction treatment, but like
any system that’s been around awhile, there’s a lot wrong as well[^9]. Everyone from
Congress to HBO is starting to recognize addiction as a disease, but the bulk of
current addiction professionals, while they use the word disease, do not act as if
they are treating one.

To see what I mean, let’s look at the language the field uses. My colleague in
New York, Ed Salsitz, has been on the bandwagon to clean up our verbiage for a
long time. In his talks he shows a picture of a full urine cup with dirt poured
over it, “Now that’s a dirty urine.” His point is that patients don’t have
“dirty urine” any more than a diabetic patient who has glucose in his urine has
“dirty urine.” What they both have is a medical test positive for a certain
result. Using the term “dirty” adds an element of judgment that we would never
use in any other medical illness.

Here’s another one, “detox.” What a crazy word to use in the context of
addiction. The original medical meaning of detoxification is “a metabolic
process by which the body rids itself of toxic chemicals.” The way the
addiction treatment field uses the word started only in the 1970s: to get
someone off of intoxicating substances. We aren’t “detoxing” anyone. The “toxin”
is already gone. What we’re doing is medically managing the withdrawal symptoms
caused by the abrupt cessation of the toxin. Ed’s point is that by using
“street” language rather than medical language, the addiction treatment field
is holding itself back from professionalism and professional recognition.

Here’s one Ed doesn’t mention but that I think is silly, “aftercare.” It
suggests just what is meant, that the person doing the treatment believes
that the “care” is over and that this is a period after care. It’s not; it’s
continuing care. The illness of addiction is chronic through the life span, why
should care end for addiction any more than it should end for diabetes or high
blood pressure. But most people treating addiction today are not medical
professionals and many are not even counseling professionals, and the field has
hijacked some medical terminology that suggests meanings that aren’t inherent
in current practice. In fact, it is current practice to believe that a period of
inpatient or intensive outpatient treatment is a complete treatment and that the
care has been given. That comes from the current practice of focusing on
inpatient treatment facilities that often need to take people from many miles
away because of the expense of treatment. Could you imagine treating diabetes
like that? Go off to Atlanta to get your diabetes regulated with insulin, then,
now that you’re treated, go back home and get after care usually not including
insulin. No wonder treatment has such high relapse rates.

That brings me to the revolution. If addiction were a chronic medical condition
that is now being treated with acute treatment and aftercare, what would happen
if we did it differently? Diabetes is often suggested as a model of a chronic
disease like addiction: chronic, progressive, incurable, and fatal if untreated.
They have similar rates of non-adherence to the plan of care (50-70%) and both
involve medication treatment along with lifestyle changes[^10]. When the state of
North Carolina started treating its diabetic Medicaid patients with a chronic
disease management model the relapse (return to uncontrolled glucose) rate fell
from 55 to 33%[^11]. And they didn’t include any treatment for alcoholism or
compulsive overeating, two expressions of addiction that lead to diabetic
relapse.

To understand how we can use chronic disease management in addiction we’re going
to have to define the word relapse. Currently it is used in the addiction field,
like so many other medical terms, in a non-medical way. In every other branch of
medicine relapse means return of symptoms after symptom suppression. In
addiction what is meant is lack of adherence to the care plan. In diabetes the
care plan includes not eating cake but eating cake is not a relapse; it is a
lack of adherence to the care plan. In addiction the care plan includes not
using drugs or compulsive behaviors, but it’s called relapse as if the drug use
was the symptom of the illness. The symptom of addiction is not drug use; it is
the symptoms that cause drug use.

What are the symptoms of addiction? All drugs of abuse (including behaviors that
can be expressions of addiction) cause a temporary increased dopamine tone in
the brain’s reward system. Lowered tone of dopamine in the reward system has a
specific set of symptoms that precede drug use: relative anhedonia, poor
attention, irritability, inability to attach to others, and more. The brain
with addiction remembers that those symptoms can be alleviated for a brief spell
with the use of a reward; of course, it’s going to want to go get it. Let’s
look at how our thinking would change if we looked at symptoms in relation to
relapse rather than lack of adherence to care plan?

One thing that would happen is that problems would be found sooner when they are
more manageable. Instead of finding out that Johnny has problems when his
monitoring urine test comes back positive, we hear about it a month earlier
while screening for the primary symptoms by phone or during continuing care
meetings. Another thing that happens is that it gives us the cause to treat
rather than the result. How successful should it be to treat the result of an
illness (drug use) rather than the cause (symptoms)? I don’t think any doctor
would have much of a success rate with putting a pneumonia patient in an ice
water bath to reduce their fever. I can envision quite a few funerals and
malpractice suits with that one. Instead of trying to stop drug use (like
merely giving an opioid dependent patient an opioid blocker) we’d give medicines
that relieved the symptoms so that the patient’s brain wouldn’t tell him to go
get opiates.

Think about what such a program would look like. Patients would come in for a
specific program of stabilization and intensive treatment to prepare them for
lifelong chronic disease management and then transfer to continuing care with
appropriate monitoring and continuing education and support. The barriers to
getting to care, should problems arise, will decrease and “relapses” will be
handled much earlier with fewer complications lowering total costs to insurers
and society.

So, who will be offended? Well, it’s going to be somebody, but it won’t be the
patients, insurers or society in general. The only people offended will be those
dogmatic believers in the “we always did it that way” approach. But, then again,
that’s who gets offended in every revolution.


[9]: First version of this section was published in my blog, addictiondoctor.org, (addictiondoctor.org/?p=15) in May 2008.

[10]: McLellan AT, et al, “Drug Dependence, a Chronic Medical Illness. JAMA. 2000;284(13):1689-1695.

[11]: Ricketts T.C., et al, “Evaluation of Community Care of North Carolina Asthma and Diabetes Management Initiatives: January 2000-December 2002,” The Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research, Chapel Hill, NC. April 15, 2004, available at: http://www.communitycarenc.com/PDFDocs/Sheps%20Eval.pdf.
