












<center><h2>Genetics</h2></center>
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

 
### Genetics and Addiction

Just swing a cat these days and you’ll hit a new paper on genetics in addiction.
This is how they usually go: “We got together a big group of people with
problematic use of a chemical and another group that doesn’t use that chemical.
We measured single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes that we think may
have to do with addiction to the drug and this is what we found.” The results
are either positive or negative for a correlation between the group using that
drug and a particular SNP. These studies are very interesting and usually end up
in a lot of press response that “the gene for (fill in the blank) addiction has
been found.” The problem is that there are a lot of pitfalls with this common
methodology and the studies don’t mean what everyone thinks they mean.

The first problem is selection of the subjects. Currently DSM5 divides addiction
(which it limits to a diagnosis of Severe Substance Use Disorder) into different
diagnoses based on the drug used. So when scientists go to select subjects they
select for those with a particular DSM diagnosis. The problem is that a lot of
things other than the illness go into what drug the person comes to treatment
with. Culture, availability and family upbringing all have to do with what drug
is used and confound the genetic biology of the illness. For instance, a good
percentage of people that come to treatment for “opioid dependence” have a
strong history of cocaine use. Many of these will say that they didn’t like
cocaine much and didn’t use it much, but others will say that cocaine worked
well to relieve the symptoms of addiction, in fact it worked better than opioids,
however the cocaine is harder to get and opioids last longer. So biologically
what’s the difference between someone who is using opioids because that’s the
best drug and someone who is using opioids because it’s their second best drug
and they don’t like the first because of a social or legal rather than reward
phenomenon? We’ll never know if they both get stuck in the same group of opioid
addicts for a study.

Or consider a group of 'alcoholics.' Some are drinking because of low dopmaine
tone, some for high dopamine tone, and some just to gain oblivion because they
live is such poor circumstances, they can't stand it. Would we expect such a
biologically hetergeneous group to have common genetics?

Another problem is the reporting of the SNPs that are associated with the
addicted group without any knowledge of what the SNP does to the active protein.
That, by it self, isn’t bad but most of these studies never hold out the
possibility of the effect going both ways. It’s pretty easy to assume that if a
receptor is mutated it doesn’t work as well as the normal, but that’s not a good
assumption. There are many examples of polymorphisms where the mutation causes
over activity rather than under activity of the protein. For instance there is a
commonly studied mutation of the COMT enzyme that breaks down dopamine. The
people who did the original work didn’t say this but many people assumed that
this meant that the mutation kept COMT from working and therefore there was too
much dopamine causing enhanced reward and leading to drug use and abuse. However,
it turned out that the COMT enzyme actually works better with this polymorphism
and so one would suppose a lower dopamine level leading to under activation and
craving. The difference here may seem small but it leads to two entirely
different world views of addiction: that drugs cause reward via dopamine and we
should block the effect to stop drug use or that people who are addicted have a
generally lower dopamine tone and need dopamine increasing treatments to stop
using.

The third problem is that of using a SNP by itself. Increasingly, and I’m glad,
studies are dropping associations with single SNPs for associations with
haplotypes. A haplotype is a grouping of SNPs. For instance lets say that Gene A
has 4 SNPs (1,2,3, and 4) each can be either A or G. The haplotypes would be
groups of these combinations such as AAGA or AGGA. This is important because one
SNP may change the way the protein works and another change it back or cause
some other effect. So if we only look at the first one, we will see an
association that may not be there or fail to see one that is. Of course what we
really need, and what we are close to getting, is complete sequencing.

So, simply, these three problems stand in our way. Of course, there are more
problems, but I want to keep this simple. We don’t know the function of the SNPs
we’re measuring and without that we don’t know what to do with the information.
We don’t have biological divisions that make sense when testing subjects so we
aren’t going to find out the biologically important information. And lastly we
should focus on the thing that actually works, the whole protein, not a single
amino acid in the protein and therefore we should study haplotypes or even full
sequences more so than single SNPs.

When these three problems get more attention it will become much more common
that genetic studies inform treatment for illnesses, including addiction. More
data is comining in all the time.
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

 
### The Heritability of Addiction

I had a conversation with a colleague in which she took issue with my saying
that addiction was largely a genetic illness. She pointed out that in studies of
alcohol dependence and cocaine dependence and other DSM5 substance use disorder
diagnoses that the heritability accounted for about 50% (actually the studies
were done with DSM IIIR and DSMIV, but the field is using DSM5 so I’m trying to
stay consistent). So how could I say addiction is a largely genetic illness when
only half of the variance is explained by genetics? Good question. We have to
start with the fact that alcohol dependence, cocaine dependence and any other
DSM 5 substance use disorder diagnosis aren’t the same as addiction. Here’s a
case that is an example of why this is important.

A young man of 24 enters treatment for addiction. He has been using a lot of
cocaine and all efforts to stop have not availed. He feels terrible whenever he
stops and immediately relapses. His history is negative for heavy drinking, “I
wouldn’t touch the stuff.” It seems his father was a violent alcoholic and the
son swore to himself that he’d never be like his father and never touch alcohol.
After all, if you don’t drink you’ll never become an alcoholic. But his not
drinking did not protect him from the illness of addiction.

So if this young man were in one of those heritability studies on alcoholism
what would he add? He would be the biological son of an alcoholic father who was
not alcoholic, and his data would serve to decrease the estimated heritability
of alcohol dependence. But what if we measured for addiction? He would be the
biological son of someone with addiction who has addiction and his data would
serve to increase the estimated heritability of addiction.

We really don’t know what the heritability is of addiction because no one has
ever looked! Science has split the illness up into the “addictions” and a bunch
of stuff not even allowed to count in the addiction field and measured the
heritability of each of those, but never as a single entity.

This young man’s case is not at all unusual, though it’s more common to meet
someone who is an opioid addict, compulsive overeater or gambler with an
alcoholic father than a cocaine addict with an alcoholic father. So in general
I think the heritability of addiction is under estimated by current studies in
the literature.

To be fair let’s consider the opposite example. What about the people in a
heritability study of alcoholism who were born of non-alcoholic parents but have
addiction. Wouldn’t they decrease the heritability of addiction if we looked at
the disease as a single entity? Perhaps, but remember the parents were non-
alcoholic. No one asked them if they had addiction, only if they used alcohol in
the illness of addiction. There were possibly some of those “non-alcoholics” who
were compulsive overeaters or compulsive gamblers, etc.

In truth I rarely meet a person with addiction who doesn’t have a family history
of the illness though they may not think so at first. If you only include “drugs”
in your definition you may not see Mom’s compulsive shopping/spending as the
illness and think that you are the only one. Usually the family goes along with
this, as Mom doesn’t want to label her shopping the same as Junior’s drug use.

There are people who get addiction without any genetic component but it isn’t
easy and it isn’t common. There has to be pressure on them and the social
setting to bring it about. That pressure exists in our society and it does
happen, but for the most part, addiction is a largely genetic illness.

A couple of years ago the American Society of Addiction Medicine published a new
definition of addiction as a biological illness. With that new unified definition
of addiction, a new era of addiction studies and treatment had begun. The
definition promised to actually catch up with clinical practice and allow
scientists to start addressing the questions that need answering. Ones like,
“What’s the heritability of addiction?”

Unfortunately, ASAM was under pressure almost from the moment of its new
definition to change it, and it since has done so. This pressure largely came
from federal agencies and academic centers, but the decentralization of genetic
science is moving faster than those in current power can move to stop the flow
of new findings. There is still hope.
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>


### To be A1 or not to be A1; that is the question

At an ASAM State of the Art Conference in Washington a few years ago I heard two
really good talks on addiction where food is the drug or overeating is the
process. Of course, the presenters didn’t put it quite that way. The first talk
was by Gene-Jack Wang who has done a lot of the neuroimaging in addiction and
found a lot of evidence that addiction is a single disease. Unfortunately, he
interprets his findings differently and so titled his talk, “Overlapping Neural
Circuits in Addiction and Obesity.” You can see from the title of the talk the
focus on obesity still doesn’t look at the disease but the result; we might as
well try to study diabetes by focusing on people who lost their feet. The other
place I differ with Dr Wang’s conclusions is that he interprets his findings to
mean that it’s the increased dopamine reward response that makes us eat more. I
don’t think that’s true for most of the addicts I treat, and they are the target
of his work.

The second talk was by Eric Stice called, “Reward Circuitry Responsivity
Predicts Weight Gain.” While Dr Wang’s talk was quite good, it’s Dr Stice’s talk
that really gives us some information we didn’t have. He presented a number of
studies that built a picture that determines who gains weight over the next year
and who doesn’t.  Right there, you can see this is new because he’s not talking
about rats and he’s not looking at people after the fact. He’s looking at the
biology that determines their eating, not the biology caused by their eating.
Rather than going into all the studies he presented, I want to just give you the
picture he presented as I see it.

He showed that one would normally expect a dopamine response in the brain from
food and even from thinking about food. He’s the first scientist I’ve heard who
has said what people with addiction have long known, that the problem is low
dopamine in the brain, not the dopamine from the drug.

In the studies they looked at, people who had two different forms of the
dopamine receptor. One form has a lower response to seeing the brain’s dopamine
and the other was normal. So those with the first form will presumably have a
lower dopamine tone and need more of something to feel the dopamine release
caused by it. The second form will feel normal dopamine release with a normal
reward. Let’s call these two forms of the dopamine receptor A1 and A2.

For the A1 people, the less their brain lit up when presented with food, the
more likely they were to gain weight over the next year. That makes sense
because they will need more food to feel the dopamine. For the A2 people it was
just the opposite. For them, the more their brain responded to food the more
likely they were to gain weight. Both groups can become obese.

The A2 people seem to act like Dr Wang expects; they far outnumber A1 people at
about 75% to 25%, so he would mostly see the A2 people. The A1 people are the
people I’m used to seeing that come for treatment for addiction regardless of
what food or behavior they use.

For normal, or A2, people the more rewarding foods are the more they’ll gain
weight – just like Dr Wang suggests. If they want to lose weight, they just
change their environment, get rid of rich foods, etc. However for the A1 people
it’s the less reward they feel from food the more they’ll eat to feel normal,
and the more they’ll gain weight. These people don’t respond to diet or
environmental change; they will go get the dopamine some other way. So not every
obese person has Addiction, it depends on why they’re obese, just as I’ve
suggested with alcohol.

Again we come to the importance of knowing our genetic makeup. It’s really
important for us to know what risks there are in genes so we can know how to
'modify our lives. Also, it’s important for treatment Dr Stice’s A1 people need
augmentation of their dopamine tone so that they can eat less food and the A2
people perhaps need diet and environmental management and perhaps attenuation of
their dopamine tone so they can eat less and lose weight.
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>


### GWAS or GWASn’t

GWAS stands for Genome Wide Association Study. In a GWAS we’d take two groups, one that has an illness and one who doesn’t and then look across the entire genome in a shotgun type of way to see what genetic polymorphisms are associated with that illness. As you can imagine, we’d need a large number of people in both groups. For illnesses where there is no theory as to why they occur or no known pathophysiology to aim at, it’s a great way to get started.
For those who don’t have a biological definition of addiction or for those who use DSM’s behavioral approach to diagnosis, it sounds like a good idea. Too bad the disease of addiction didn’t read the DSM.

I’ve looked at the genome wide testing of over 1800 people in the last three years or so and, among other things, I looked at some SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) that the addiction literature said were important because of findings in previous large, respected GWAS studies. For instance there were 4 genes implicated in some of those studies, but the studies weren’t really on addiction. They used diagnoses such as alcohol dependence, cocaine dependence or nicotine dependence. The bottom line is that I’ve stopped looking at those SNPs because after the first 100 people I looked at there were no differences between those with and without addiction and no differences by the most commonly used drug in those with addiction. I’ll tell you more reasons in a bit.

Now those who laud GWAS studies for addiction will say that I was too hasty. “Only a hundred people? Those studies had thousands of people. How can you make any determination after only 100 people?” Because I practice medicine on one person at a time and will never see 10,000 patients in my lifetime. Things that are only seen in high-powered studies may be of interest to academics but they aren’t of interest to my patients. There are a few more reasons why I’m not looking for arcane one in 10,000 associations.

Addiction is a terminal, chronic, incurable illness with population prevalence of about 10 to 20% and is the ultimate cause behind the top 5 leading causes of death of Americans. Anything that important and that common has to have important factors that don’t need 10,000 subjects to see. Also, none of the studies were actually studies of an illness called addiction; they studied things like alcohol dependence. Let’s just take a minute to look at alcohol dependence and what GWAS studies measure.

According to the old DSM nomenclature, to have the diagnosis of alcohol dependence you have to have three out of 7 alcohol related behavioral criteria in a single 12-month period. You can have them because your opioid receptor doesn’t work well and alcohol works to boost the signal. You can have them because your dopamine receptor doesn’t work well and alcohol works to boost dopamine release. You can have them because you’re being beaten at home and alcohol helps to tune out the pain. You can have them because you feel anxious and obsessive and alcohol helps you to calm down. You can have them because there used to be a good reason for you to drink too much, but even though the reason is gone now, you can’t stop because of the withdrawal symptoms. I can keep going with another couple of dozen reasons, but I think you get the point. The group that meets the criteria for alcohol dependence is biologically heterogeneous to such an extent that they don’t even all have the disease of addiction. And those that do, probably have it for multiple reasons.

So those that laud GWAS studies are now saying, “That’s my point. The population is so heterogeneous that you need a large sample to find the multiple factors.” That would be true if we didn’t have actual biological targets for the disease. If you read DSM, we don’t. If you understand addiction as a biological illness, we do. And if you look at the targets that derive from such an understanding, you don’t need 10,000 people in your sample.

For instance we saw in our first 40 patients a marker for deciding who needs Deplin and had a good model of markers for that medication within the first 100 patients. That was based on understanding how that medication actually works in addiction and testing it. We found in our first 100, a marker for those that can’t handle dopamine increases and need GABAb agents first. That’s because we had an understanding of how that addiction works.

If I’ve stopped looking at the result of GWAS studies, what should we do instead? The first thing is to define addiction in a biological, not behavioral, sense. This book does that. Then look for the actual biological factors that exist in the model and test them multiple times in populations only large enough to power the study. This will not lead us to a gene for addiction, but nothing else will either. There isn’t one SNP for cystic fibrosis, there are at least 30. There isn’t one gene for diabetes, but several. It will be the same for addiction.

Here’s an example of a study that someone could do right now if they happen to have a large genetic dataset. Ask everyone in the dataset one question, “When you took your first opioid pain medication of your life, did it give you energy?” That’s a specific biological factor that is likely genetic. Now look at the SNPs you have for the opioid receptors and the pro-opiomelanocortin gene, and if you want, add the dopamine reward system and the liver enzymes that break down opioids. Select only as big a subset of your dataset that you need to power a large effect size, because the factor has a large effect size. In this case about 10% of the population gets energy from opioids and their experience is not even close to the response of the other 90% of the population who get a little nauseated and take a nap. Any SNPs stand out as being associated with energy on first taking opioids? Now repeat the study on the other parts of your dataset to confirm it. If you have a dataset of 10,000 individuals and did this ten times you’d have the most confirmed finding in science history.

This is the kind of work that is going to become very available and bump us ahead in our scientific understanding. As more and more people get genome wide testing for themselves, either direct from the companies offering them or through their doctor, the more people will be available to participate in this kind of research. And when I say participate, I mean participate. While we ask them, for instance, what the response to their first opioid is we may also want to ask them what other things they think may be biologically related to their addiction. For instance, “Of the other people you know with addiction, what traits did you have in common with them before your first use of any drug?” To be honest, so much addiction research has been done without being informed by the experience of those with the disease, that academic research has really lost its way. Now that ASAM has defined addiction in a biological sense, and future researchers will research the validity of the definition, we will start to actually have research on addiction. It’s about time.
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>


### Genetics of Dopamine Related Factors

Well that’s the question, isn’t it? Hopefully this will answer it. First, we need to understand that our work with genetics will not answer the question of whether or not someone has the disease of addiction. Addiction is a complex chronic illness with many determinants, and will likely never have a clear single test for its presence or absence. The second thing we need to understand is that the genetic testing will give us a view of how the patient was born, and unless you’re treating a neonate, a lot has happened to him since then. Age and damage from reward usage or lifestyle can change the original functioning a great deal. Finally, beyond genetics there are epigenetic factors that we don’t have much of a view into currently. For instance if someone is heterozygous for a trait, there is evidence that in some genes one or the other form is suppressed. This complicates greatly the predictive power that genetics can have in a complex illness. Diet, exercise, environment, and many other factors can also have epigenetic influences that can complicate a calculation made purely on the genetics of the patient. But with all that said, let’s take a look at what we can see.

Genetics can give us a glimpse into the workings of both neurotransmitters and their receptors. We can see some aspects of drug and medication metabolism. Issues of permeability of the blood brain barrier and miscellaneous factors can be seen. All these factors and more lie along an axis of scientific quality from rigorous definition by extended trials to pure speculation. Unfortunately it is skewed towards the latter, because no one has done much with the genetics of addiction. The closest thing we have is the genetics of this or that substance dependence syndrome, which may or may not have anything to do with the underlying illness of addiction. Seems like I just can’t stop telling you about the limitations, huh? You’re probably ready for me to say something positive.

One thing positive we know has nothing to do with genetics. That’s our biological model. Without it the genetics won’t do us any good at all. So before I tell you how the genetics can be useful, I’ll repeat a couple of things about the model.

In the model there are two main points around dopamine: dopamine tone and dopamine spike. Generally if you bring tone up to normal the spike will fix itself but sometimes, and we think this is genetic, the spike is not normalized with dopamine tone and will need a separate treatment. We should remember that when dealing with dopamine tone, we want to treat, as much as is possible, from upstream to downstream. Finally, there is also to be considered the aspect of cue induced craving from a glutamate signal from the Amygdala to the VTA.

Dopamine tone: This was introduced earlier and we won’t go through it again here except to point out the various areas of intervention. We can increase dopamine production. We can increase dopamine release, both directly and indirectly. We can decrease dopamine metabolism. And finally, we can decrease dopamine reuptake.

We can take another look at Equation 2, which has three terms. The three terms, Dopamine, Dopamine Receptors, and Time can be expanded to specific factor that map to specific genetic targets.

Equation 3 - Dopamine Amount Expanded
DA =(DA Production × DA Release ÷ DA Catabolism in synapse)

and one of these can be further expanded:

Equation 4 - Dopamine Release Expanded
DA Release ≈Rate of Vesicular Release × Dopamine per each Vesicle

Within these equations, we could replace each biological function with the gene products that are responsible for that function. Alteration of those gene products would give us the expected alteration in the outcome.

So

Equation 5 - DA Production Genetic Targets
DA Production ≈Tyrosine Hydroxylase × Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase

Equation 6 - DA Release Genetic Targets
DA Release ≈(μ Receptor × Nicotine Receptor ÷Serotonin 2a Receptor)× Vesicular Transporter ÷MAOb

And the time function also has genetic targets:
Equation 7 - Time Genetic Targets
Time ≈1÷Dopamine Transporter × COMT

Dopamine spike: The dopamine spike is the reinforcing signal in reward. It is the result of a positive feedback loop between the dopaminergic VTA and the endorphin producing Nucleus Accumbens. It can be affected by anything that can affect the positive feedback loop. We can intervene with GABAb receptor agonists to moderate the spike and resulting crash. There are other ways to stop the spike such as complete endorphin antagonism, but such a method can leave one, not with a modulated spike, but with no spike.

So, this leads us to an overview of the algorithmic approach to Type II addiction whether it is inherent or has come about as a result of drug use in a Type I patient. The first step is to determine if the patient was genetically a Type II or not. If the patient was genetically Type I who became Type II, then it is necessary to treat the Type I symptoms first before raising dopamine tone. We can do that with a non-benzodiazepine/non-barb GABA agent of choice or an SSRI. (Caution is required with SSRIs because they can lower dopamine release increasingly as time passes via the HTR2a receptor.)

If the patient is a primary Type II, then determine if he has high risk of aberrantly high dopamine spike by looking at the DRD2 receptor. If so treat with a non-benzodiazepine/non-barb GABA agent, but not an SSRI.

Then continue on to see if the patient has deficient MTHFR function. If so give Deplin 7.5mg qd for heterozygote or equivalent or 7.5mg bid for homozygote or equivalent. Then determine polymorphisms at MAOb, receptor, and ACHRNA4. If  polymorphisms appear to have decreased dopamine release consider Suboxone. If ACHRNA4, then Chantix. If MAOb is hyperactive, then Emsam. If the patient is still symptomatic after increasing dopamine release, add Wellbutrin XL, unless they are on a MAOI. (Also exercise caution when using Wellbutrin in someone with MAOb polymorphisms whether they are on an MAOI or not. Such patients can have a poop-out effect a few weeks after starting Wellbutrin.) Also consider raising dopamine at the receptor with Rhodiola rosea if COMT has a polymorphism that works overtime. If, after raising dopamine at the receptor, the patient is still having cue induced craving, add Campral. As each change in medication is stabilized, re-measure the Townsend symptom score and the neurocognitive testing. Now we’ll go through it again with more specifics.

Determining if the patient if primary Type II or not: This is done primarily by history. A primary Type II patient will give a history have having had symptoms as far back as he can remember which were at first and at once relieved by doing something to raise his dopamine tone. He will have generally enjoyed stimulants from the first and likely had a strong family history of the illness. The patient who was a primary Type I will have an almost opposite history. He will have not had low dopamine symptoms as a child and probably didn’t like his first use of a stimulant drug.

Determining if the patient has a high risk of an aberrant dopamine spike: There are two ways to see this, one of which is currently not available. The two ways are looking for DRD2s polymorphisms and the other is to look at polymorphisms of the GABAb receptor that decrease its function. Currently, the GABAb route is theoretical; there are no known polymorphisms of the GABAb receptor that have been identified as lowering GABAb activity. The DRD2 receptor, as previously discussed, comes in two forms. There are two known polymorphisms that decrease the percentage of the short form (auto-receptor). There is no science on whether they both have to be minor alleles or whether the effect is only in homozygotes. What we can see from our population is that most people that have one of them have them both. The best we can tell now is that any polymorphism that decreases the percentage of DRD2s could be a risk for an aberrant spike.

Determining if there is deficient MTHFR functioning: There are two polymorphisms identified as decreasing MTHFR function. One decreases the amount of the enzyme produced and seems to not have quite as much effect as the other. This first one is dominant, so heterozygotes will be affected the same as heterozygotes. The second polymorphism is the structural polymorphism. The presence of this allele makes an enzyme that does not function normally. Heterozygotes have a 33% reduction in function and homozygotes have a 76% reduction in function. Heterozygotes of the second form who also have the first should be dosed the same as homozygotes.

Determining if there is a polymorphism that may be decreasing dopamine release: There are a few to consider. First there are the three known polymorphisms of  receptor that are associated with decreased function. Next there is a well-described haplotype of the ACHNRA4 subunit that is associated with increased nicotine dependence. Thirdly, there are polymorphisms of the 5HT2a receptor that can increase its function, lowering dopamine release. Finally, there is a polymorphism of the MAOb enzyme that increases its function, decreasing the amount of dopamine that is packaged in each vesicle, thereby decreasing vesicular release. Polymorphisms of VMAT that decrease function would have the same role but there is no known medication to correct any VMAT deficiency.

Determining if there is reason to raise dopamine at the Nucleus Accumbens: There are four polymorphisms that either decrease DRD2 density or decrease DRD2 efficacy. There is no hard science on these except for one, which has been repeatedly linked to DSM diagnoses linked to low DA tone. However, this one is not the whole story. In addition there is a gene called CAMK4 that creates a linkage protein in the second messenger system that has been associated with addiction. On the other side, there is a polymorphism that is linked to increase euphoria with increased dopamine tone. So, first we would screen for this last polymorphism, and if it’s NOT present, we would then check for CAMK4. If that polymorphism is present, the need for increased dopamine tone even with good production and release is likely. If CAMK4 is normal, we could look at the number of the remaining 4 polymorphisms, but this final step is not backed by hard science. Hopefully, in the future, Townsend will be able to answer this question.

Determining if the patient is at risk for cue induced craving: At this point, it is less about genetics than about clinical reality. You have increased dopamine production and release if necessary, and you have increased the dopamine level at the receptor if called for. The patient either has cue induced craving or he has not. This type of craving seems to be related to the GRM5 receptor, for which there are no known polymorphisms. This is something we are in a unique position to answer as we have the GRM5 SNPs and, potentially, clinical data on the response to Campral, a glutamate modulator.
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>


### The Genetics of Non-dopamine Factors

Blood Brain Barrier: There are four known polymorphisms for ABCB1, the protein that provides the “holes” in the blood brain barrier (BBB). We divide people into three groups for this analysis: tight, normal range, and loose with respect to the tightness of the BBB. Patients with a “tight” BBB will need higher peripheral levels of a chemical in order to get the desired level in the brain, than will “normal” patients. And so, people with “normal” tightness to their BBB will need higher peripheral blood levels to get the same CNS concentration as people with a “loose” BBB. The tightness of the BBB, in general determines how high the peripheral blood level of a chemical has to be in order to get a therapeutic level in the brain. Because the adverse effects of a medication are generally related to peripheral blood level, the BBB status can vary the risk of such effects on the patient. When dealing with a patient with a “tight” BBB, one has the choice of pushing the blood level very high in order to get enough into the brain or adjusting medication to, for instance, hit the same biological target from multiple directions at lower levels so as to keep the peripheral blood level of any one medication lower than that which would cause adverse effects.


#### The Genetics of Drug and Medication Metabolism

There are some general principles for looking at these enzymes, which, by the way, are largely responsible for determining the peripheral blood level of the medication we give and the drugs that people take. The first principle to be understood is that very few, if any, of these enzymes are solely responsible for their action. There is a great deal of overlap between them, which creates confusion. Second, they can be induced and inhibited by various of their substrates in a non-straightforward way. Thirdly, they all have a wild type, or normal, configuration which is denoted, by convention, as *1.

CYP1A2: This enzyme metabolizes caffeine, imipramine, clomipramine, fluvoxamine, ondansetron, melatonin, and, to some extent, warfarin among others. Ondansetron (Zofran) is a 5HTR3 antagonist that has been shown to be helpful in Type I alcoholics and it has been associated with QT prolongation and torsade de pointes. CYP1A2 has several subtypes based on polymorphism in addition to the wild type, *1. These common types are: *1C, *1F, *1K, *3, *4, *5, *6, *8, *11, *16. Of these, only a few are noteworthy. CYP1A2*1F has increased enzymatic activity in smokers regardless of what other type they have. *1C, *1K, *3, *6, *16 all have decreased function.

CYP2A6: This enzyme is responsible for breaking down nicotine and cotinine as well as metabolizing valproic acid. CYP2A6*1 is, of course, wild type. *2, *5, and *6 have near complete loss of all activity. *9 has decreased function, and *17 has increased function. There is no science on the function of the enzyme when heterozygous for both a lowering and raising polymorphisms.

CYP2B6: This enzyme is responsible most for the metabolism of bupropion though other enzymes are involved. Also it metabolizes selegiline (Emsam), sertraline, nicotine, modafinil, ketamine, and valproic acid. CYP2B6*2 has increased function; types *6, *11, and *15 have decreased function; and types *16 and *28 have very decreased function. Again, there is no science predicting function when someone is heterozygous for both function increasing and decreasing polymorphisms. This statement will not be repeated, as it is true throughout for all of these enzymes.

CYP2C9: This enzyme has little to do with drugs our patients use or the medications we use to treat them. It has only a minor role in the metabolism of cannabinoids. It is included in our reports because it is of such importance in general health and because it is such a good illustration of why pharmacogenomics is so important. 2C9 is the primary enzyme for metabolizing warfarin and the activities of its polymorphisms have been well studied. *2 heterozygotes have 20% reduction in function and 40% for homozygotes, and *3 heterozygotes have 40% reduction in function and 80% for homozygotes. *6 is completely inactive, while *5, *8, *11 and *12 are only slightly decreased in function. This allows us to give a percentage of function calculation most of the combinations found in the patients. For instance if a patient is “*1/*2” then they would have a calculated function of 80%. If they were “*2/*3” it would be 40% of normal function.

CYP2C19: This is a most important enzyme in general health. Most of the medications that are advertised directly to patients on TV (Nexium, Plavix, etc.) are metabolized by 2C19. There are several non-functional types: *2, *2B, *4 (recessive), *6, *7, *8. In addition there are some poor metabolizing types: *3, *9, and perhaps *10. What is most interesting about CYP2C19 is that there is also a fast metabolizing type: *17. There is no science on what happens when *17 is mixed with a non-functional or slow acting type. Types *2 and *17 are the most common in our population with about a third being positive for *2 and about half that for *17, so the combination is not unheard of. In general we can tell that if someone is *1/*2, they are somewhat slower, and if *2/*2, then a lot slower, than normal. If *1/*17, they are somewhat faster, and if *17/*17, then a lot faster, than normal. In the case of Plavix, a pro-drug, slow metabolizers never make enough of the active metabolite to respond to the medicine. In the case of Nexium, slow metabolizers don’t need to take it as frequently or in as high a dose. So CYP2C19 is another enzyme with which to illustrate the basic principles of pharmacogenomics.

CYP2D6: This is a very important enzyme for us in that it metabolizes most SSRIs and, though not usually recognized, methadone. The genetics of 2D6 is complicated in that not only do the alleles affect function, but there is also copy number variation of the gene itself so that someone with lower functioning alleles can have normal function because they have increased copies of the gene. We cannot test for copy number variation with SNP testing – this requires much more expensive sequencing tests. In general CYP2D6 has some decreased function variants: *9, *10, *17, and *41 and also some non-functioning variants: *3B, *4F, *4G, *6, *7, *8, *12, *14, *20.  In addition, there is in the literature, a concept for quantifying 2D6 function that divides people into poor metabolizers, intermediate metabolizers and extensive metabolizers. In this scheme *1 is given a score of 1, the non-functional types a score of 0, and the low functioning types a score of .5. The alleles are added up so that a *1/*1 score would be a 2 and a *12/*17 would score a 0.5. In this scheme a person with a zero would be a poor metabolizer, someone with a .5 would be an intermediate metabolizer and someone with a 1 or more would be an extensive metabolizer. While the scheme is widely adopted there are no actual studies of blood levels to back it up and it seems overly generous in its assumption of multiple copies of the gene.

CYP3A4: This is the enzyme that is primarily responsible for metabolizing buprenorphine to nor-buprenorphine. While there are several types that effect function, the only one we’ve seen in our population is *1B which has increased function. *1B is a post-migration African derived polymorphism. This means that we would see it in people of African descent. This raises several interesting issues. One is that there is a literature describing higher doses in populations with a higher percentage of African-Americans and some interpretation of that literature to suggest a greater degree of diversion or abuse because of this higher average dose. The studies involved took no notice of the genetics that could explain the entire finding. Another interesting illustration that CYP3A4 gives us is that even people who are “white” can have this allele. My half-sister and I (we share an Irish mother) both have this polymorphism, and no one would ever look at either of us and think that we have African ancestry. This illustrates why pharmacogenomics is so important in healthcare. We cannot take a person’s entire genetics for granted because of the color of his skin or any other single feature. Ethnicity doesn’t exist in the world of genetics. Even in things such as hypertension where we were taught that European-Americans with HTN are more likely to respond to an ACE inhibitor while African-Americans are more likely to respond to a beta-blocker, we should not be looking at skin color, but rather at the actual genetics to see who is the best candidate for which treatment.

UGT2B7: This is another very interesting enzyme for us. It is not an enzyme of primary metabolism like the CYP enzymes are, but rather a part of the glucuronidation pathway. UGT2B7 specifically glucuronidates nor-buprenorphine so that it can be excreted in the urine. There are types *2a and *2b, both of which have higher function than *1. What is most common in our population is to see *1/*2a. Those patients with *2/*2 will glucuronidate nor-buprenorphine faster than most people. You can imagine from the genetics of both CYP3A4 and UGT2B7 that there will be some people who are slow metabolizers of buprenorphine and slow glucuronidation individuals of nor-buprenorphine who may have a higher buprenorphine/nor-buprenorphine ratio in their urine. However this situation is quite rare, and as mentioned above in another section, patients should have more nor-buprenorphine in their urine than buprenorphine.

 
#### One Final Genetic Marker

HLA B75 is a marker that is mostly found in those of Asian descent. In our case Asian includes Native American. Those with HLA B75 have a higher rate of Stevens-Johnson Syndrome when taking carbamazepine. It is not clear from the literature if these patients have a higher risk of SJS with other anti-epileptic medications.


 
