
<center><h2>The Twelve Steps for Doctors</h2></center>
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

 
### Why Doctors Need the Steps

You may wonder why you’d need this section. If you are in recovery yourself, you
may feel you know the steps well and have no need to read about them here. If you 
are not in recovery you may feel the steps are the purview of the counselor or not 
integral to your work. In either case, I suggest different view of the issue.

The primary goal of any inpatient addiction treatment is to create an outpatient.
The goal of outpatient addiction treatment is to create a non-patient, someone
who is no longer in need of acute, intense, professional care; such a person
would be a person in recovery. As 12-step recovery culture is the dominant
recovery culture in this country it behooves us all to not only know what the
steps are but also how to use them in medical practice.

The Addiction Medicine specialist can be of critical importance here. There are
many misunderstandings in the general public about the steps and step work.
These misunderstandings generally lead to less acceptance and willingness to
even take a look at recovery. In short, these misunderstandings make your job
harder. If you can explain these misunderstandings and ease patients’
expectations, you’ll make your job easier.

One basic thing to keep in mind to this goal is that when you meet the patient,
it is likely that his only exposure to the 12 steps is the poster on the wall of
the group room. These are the steps devoid of their instructions and meaning. It
would be as likely to profit from reading the poster and doing the steps as it
would be to read the listing of chapters in this book and trying to practice
without reading this book. Without your help, the patient may never benefit from
what’s on the wall. The instructions are in <ins>Alcoholics Anonymous</ins>, and we can
encourage the patients to read it.

One final thought: it is not helpful to skip ahead. People are ready to hear
about steps when they are. They are ready to hear about the step they are ready
to hear about. It is generally not helpful to talk about the wonderful spiritual
benefits of helping others when the patient is just struggling with the idea of
whether or not they have addiction. The Disease Acceptance Scale previously
discussed is helpful in knowing when to talk about the steps with a patient.


### Role of 12-steps in chronic disease treatment

Twelve-step recovery has been around over 75 years, but it’s one of the most
misunderstood aspects of living with addiction. First, let’s make it clear that
we don’t believe that 12-step recovery is the only way to live well with the
chronic disease of addiction. That said, we’ll explore what 12-step recovery is,
how it helps people with addiction, and finally, what other kinds of recovery
may have in common with it.

Describing what 12-step recovery is can be more easily done by describing some
of the things which it is not and addressing some common misconceptions about it.
12-step recovery groups are not lead by professionals. They are not therapy, and
they have no initiations or formal membership. Twelve-step recovery meetings
consist of groups of people at various stages in their recovery who come
together to share their experience and help each other maintain their gains.
Many people new to the idea of 12-step meetings tell us, “I don’t need to sit
around and hear other people’s problems. I have enough of my own.” If you find a
group where everyone talks about the problems of addiction and not the solutions
they’ve found, find another group. Wallowing in problems is not what 12-step
recovery is about.  Another common reason we hear for not wanting to go to
12-step meetings is the “God thing.”

Twelve-step recovery is not a religion, but it does have a spiritual element.
While religion teaches what God is, twelve-step groups encourage members to
consider their own conception of God, or whatever they want to call a power
greater than themselves. This Higher Power is a core component of recovery, and
studies have shown that people in addiction treatment who have come to believe
in a power greater than themselves stay sober longer and have better quality of
life than people who leave addiction treatment without such a concept. And
that’s all that’s needed, a concept of some power greater than oneself. The key
here isn’t so much that there is such a power, just that we’re each not our own
higher power.  Once we resign from the position of creator and director of the
universe, having some concept of something else that is seems to come naturally.

That brings up another common problem people have when considering going to
12-step recovery meetings: powerlessness. Many people confuse the phrase
“powerless over our addiction” to mean that 12-step recovery programs teach that
you can never be free of the illness and that somehow we aren’t responsible for
our own behavior. Nothing could be further from the truth. When 12-step groups
discuss powerlessness, it is in the same sense that someone with any other
chronic illness, such as diabetes, is powerless to make themselves illness free.
It doesn’t mean that the person has to be symptomatic or have a downhill course
or die of the illness.  It just means that we, by ourselves, cannot make
ourselves into people without addiction; that is, we are powerless to cure
ourselves.

So how could realizing we are powerless to cure ourselves and are not in charge
of directing the universe help us get over addiction? The answer lies in what
addiction does to the brain. As we presented earlier, the urge to get to a
normal dopamine tone in the reward center of the brain is a very strong one.
It’s so strong that as we try to live with it, we come to understand that it
cannot be denied. Since most people with addiction have symptoms of the illness
even before their first drug, we’ve all come up with ways to counter a low dopamine tone and learned to avoid those things that lower it further. Unfortunately, one of the things that happens to
many people with addiction is that we come to believe we must be able to achieve
this goal. When we are told “no” we feel as if we are failing in something. We
therefore learn to avoid hearing “no” by controlling the situation and the
people around us. Since people generally don’t accept being controlled, this
sets up conflict in which we will experience loss which also causes a decrease
in dopamine tone. Because we can’t live up to our own expectations we feel
somehow “less than” those around us. You probably figured out by now that
feeling less than causes decreased dopamine too. So addiction often results in a
vicious cycle where our brain is trying to get more dopamine, and in doing so,
puts us in situations which actually lower dopamine tone. Twelve-step recovery
stops that cycle by helping us realize we are powerless over how much dopamine
our brains make, and we aren’t in charge of getting more. It turns out that if
you can internalize that you are not, and never have to be, alone in handling
your illness, and that you are not less than anyone, you can feel better and not
live an addicted life even though the illness isn’t gone.

If that’s how 12-step recovery helps people, how do other kinds of recovery do
it? Just that same way. If you examine other forms of recovery, you’ll find that
while they may use different names or have different values, any that are
successful over long periods of time will have in common instilling in its
members that they are not alone and not less than. So if there are many forms of
recovery and they all have that in common, why are we focusing on 12-step
recovery? Well, there are a couple of reasons. First, 12-step recovery has been
around a long time and stood the test of time. It’s the form of recovery about
which there is the most research. Also, 12-step recovery, by focusing on the
actual working of the steps, helps people actively live their recovery. Just
learning that you are not alone and not less than are not enough. If they were,
you could just read this and that would be the end of it. We wish that worked,
but it doesn’t.

Good addiction treatment exists to help the patient have the life they want in
spite of having addiction. Whatever kind of recovery they choose is fine with me.
As long as they are meeting their goals and are successful in building the life
they want, I'm happy. 


### Step One

>“We admitted we were powerless over alcohol – that our lives had become unmanageable”

There are two objectionable words in this step: 'powerlessness' and
'unmanageable'. No one in America today was raised to believe that either of
those words would be complements if applied to themselves. We all naturally
bristle at their use. To the unschooled ear, this step speaks of failure. It can
make one feel less than, which lowers dopamine tone, and can stop a person’s
exploration of recovery before it even starts. But you can help this person
understand that no such message is meant or is inherent in the step.

The first place the steps are mentioned in Alcoholics Anonymous is on page 59.
That means that there are 58 pages of context before this first step is read.
With the steps having been taken out of the book and placed on the wall, most
people’s first exposure to them is without any context at all. You can provide
that context. If you are willing to learn no more than this fact, you can still,
if you find any objection in your patient, ask them not to judge the steps until
they’ve read the first 58 pages and gotten the context. If you are willing to
learn more, read on.

The context for the word powerless relates directly to the biology of the
illness and is something you are well equipped to explain. Knowing what you know
about dopamine tone and Silkworth’s “obsession of the mind” you can explain to
the person with addiction why they have not been able to stop on their own for
good. Knowing what you know about the compulsive use cycle and Silkworth’s
“allergy” you can explain to the person why they have not been able to use
moderately when they use. In short, you can explain why they can’t use like a
normal person, and why they can’t not use at all. This is all that is meant by
powerless: that the person with addiction cannot successfully keep from using
and they cannot control their use once they start. That’s it, just the biology.
There are no judgments in the steps.

If you life has become a futile effort to fight a force of nature, if your every
waking moment has been taken up with either an attempt to stop all together or
moderate what you cannot moderate, I would say that it is, by definition,
unmanageable. Addiction goes beyond the time when the patient is using a
behavior or a drug. It grows to consume their entire life. At every moment they
are either using, thinking about using, trying not to use, waiting to use or
getting over having used. Room allotted to other pursuits gets lost. That’s all
unmanageable means; it doesn’t mean that the patient is somehow deficient in
their ability to manage. It means that anyone with this illness, which is
progressive and chronic, will reach a point of unmanageability as it expands to
fill their life.

There need be no fear on the part of your patient over the words in step one. No
loss of dopamine tone need happen. All that step one means is that the biology
is there, and we accept we are ill; the rest just follows from the nature of the
illness.


### Step Two

>“Came to believe that only a power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity”

Here again there are two objectionable ideas: “power greater than ourselves” and
“sanity.” Most people read this step, and having read the word “believe,” take
“power greater than ourselves” to mean God. If the patient has fixed ideas on
the non-existence of a deity or, worse, thinks their understanding of God is
sufficient without recovery, this step can stop them cold. While I would not
argue with anyone’s religious beliefs, I would suggest that had the writers
meant God, they would have said it. As you will see, the steps do refer to God
when appropriate, but not here. Here there is only “a power greater than
ourselves,” and I think that’s all they mean.

That the patient needs a power greater than himself or herself follows naturally
from step one and the biology of the illness. At this point in a person’s
recovery the power may only be medication, you, the group, or AA. It is not
necessary for the patient to come to believe in God, only that they not believe
that they are God. What you know of the self-centering nature of low dopamine
tone can explain to the patient why they have felt they must stand alone their
entire life. You can explain why they have felt the need to be in absolute control even when they had no control at all. You can explain why the illness and the biology made them think they needed
to be the “higher power.” All that is necessary at this step is for the patient
to “come to believe” that there is something more than himself or herself,
because after step one, they have recognized that they are not, by themselves,
enough. But enough for what? Enough to restore them to sanity, which brings us
to the next objectionable word.

Again, context is everything. Reading these steps on the wall of the group room,
one might take the meaning that if one needs a power greater than oneself to
restore oneself to sanity that such a one must be insane. This vernacular brings
synonyms to mind such as psychotic, crazy, delusional, etc. These are some of
the very words that the person with addiction has been calling himself. They
will immediately assume that’s what the step means, but it has nothing to do
with that.

The context of the word sanity is found in the chapter “More About Alcoholism”
which is entirely devoted to explaining the subtle twists of mind that lead
someone to taking the first drink. This has to do with Silkworth’s “mental
obsession” and what you know about dopamine tone. There are also aspects of
cue-induced craving and something that AA couldn’t explain because it only
looked at alcohol. You understand that even non-drugs can set up a “high” and
the high is followed by the crash. You understand that the crash can lead to a
deeper craving for a bigger drug. You understand the biology that Silkworth
didn’t know about. You can explain the “insanity” of the first drink, hit, puff,
etc and tell the patient that this is the entire meaning of the word sanity in
step two.  We could restate this step in a less objectionable form: “Now that
we’ve figured out that we have this biological illness and that no person can
control a biological illness with their own mind, we realized that we will need
something besides ourselves to achieve permanent abstinence,” but that wouldn’t
fit on the poster in the group room. 


### Step Three

>“Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as we understood him”

Okay, so here God comes into the conversation, and we’re back to dealing with
the patient who doesn’t want anything to do with God, or worse, believes that
they have a sufficient understanding of God and can’t learn anything else. Let’s
take the patient who doesn’t want to have anything to do with God first.

This patient may not believe in God, but more commonly we see a patient who
doesn’t want to believe in God. That is, that they have some belief, but the
idea of God they have is repellant to them and they reject it. It’s not that
they don’t believe in God, but rather they don’t want God to be who they believe
him to be. This is a moderately easy problem to handle. Brief conversation about
their ideas about God will generally show the physician that this is the case.
One can then ally with the patient that the nature of God is not what they are
afraid of. This is usually in the nature of a punishing or demanding deity.
After brief discussion about what they are afraid God is, it is relatively easy
to then suggest, “What would you like God to be?” This may even work as
homework, asking the patient to come back to the next appointment with a list of
things they want God to be. They can be assured at this point that the decision
to turn one’s will and life over to the care of God can be to the care of God as
the patient wishes God to be, not as someone told him God is.

Of course there are patients who just don’t believe there is a God. These
patients are not prevented from taking this step. They are handled by a special
case of the technique noted above. In this case, the discussion centers on, not
God, but the nature of creation. Even if the patient has an absolute belief that
there is no act of creation, but rather just a physical accident at the core of
everything, they can still acknowledge that physical law rules the universe. It
is clear that physical law is more powerful than they. It will be clear on
discussion that their life to this point has not been in concert with physical
law. For them, this step can mean that they will be restored to sanity by
following physical law rather than attempting to be more powerful than the
universe. Many people in long recovery have made such a start.

Now there is the patient who believes that he and God have a special
relationship, and that these steps, and the whole recovery process, are beneath
them and their advanced spiritual status. This patient will protest that they
have already taken this step, that no further change on their part is necessary.
If this patient’s relationship with God is the same as the one they had when
using, it is doubtful that this will be a sufficient surrender to effect change.
If one asks them, “Well, if you’ve always lived by this step, how did you come
to be here,” one gets a load of rationalization about being tested or failing or
some other such item. It’s important to gently move the patient away from this
special status that they’ve imagined for themselves. It is a rationalization of
their uniqueness and will stand in their way of their recovery. 


### Step Four

>“Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves”

One of the things we hear often from people at the beginning of their treatment
is that they don’t want to work the steps because they look ahead to 4 and 5 and
cringe from the thought of them. Make a searching and fearless moral inventory?
You mean write down every dirty, nasty, horrible thing I’ve ever done? And then
tell someone? You’re nuts, no one would do that.

Everyone you see in recovery today had those same thoughts. Luckily, the reality
turns out to be better than we feared. First, if you’re reading this before
you’ve finished your third step, stop. You don’t need to worry about the
hurdles of tomorrow. Go back to doing what you were doing today.

It’s important to explain to patients that the reason anyone takes the fourth
and fifth steps is to get relief, not to be made more miserable. Millions of
people have taken these steps and not only survived to tell the tale, but
survived to enjoy their lives. Far from being a laundry list of dirty nasty
things (you’re right, if it was just that, none of us would have done it), the
fourth step starts with what’s bugging you. There are many ways to work the
fourth step; workbooks have been written and workshops given, but they all start
with the same thing as outlined in Alcoholics Anonymous, resentments.

While many different ways have been written to work a moral inventory, they all
stem from the method outlined over 70 years ago in Alcoholics Anonymous so we’ll
use that as the template. In working the fourth step it’s best to start with a regular sized piece of paper turned sideways, and we’ve created one that we put in the patient handbook. In the
first column (titled resentments) the patient can list everyone they have any
resentful or angry feelings about. It’s important that they don’t look ahead to
the other columns just yet; focus on the first column only. They’re just making
a list of people you’re angry at. That’s not too hard is it?

After they’ve got the first column filled in, they go back to the first name and
take a look at the second column. Here they’re only writing down why they’re
angry, what the other person did. They don’t write much in this column, just a
line about each thing that person did that brought about their angry feelings.
Things like: “He fired me,” “She cheated on me,” “He called the police on me.”
That’s not that hard either. They’re just adding what each person did to them
next to their name, one line for each thing they did. They go down the whole
list before moving to the next column.

So far we’ve asked them to do nothing very special or hard. The next column
isn’t hard either, but it is a bit special and takes some explaining. In the
third column they write down what particular thing about themselves that was
affected by the other person’s action. In doing this they are going to pick from
a short list of topics that turn out to pretty much cover every eventuality:
self-esteem, personal relations (including sex), ambitions(meaning broadly
anything we wanted to have happen), or security (physical, monetary, etc). It
turns out that these four things represent four pretty basic instincts that all
humans have. They go down the third column writing in which one or more of the
four was affected by the other person’s action.

So we have three columns filled in: The person they’re angry at, what the other
person did, and what about the patient it affected. To be honest, so far we’ve
done nothing that most people don’t do every day in their own head while keeping
a mental grudge list. This is about as far as most patients get on their own,
and if it’s as far as they get, they usually get no relief, just more anger. So,
to move on to the fourth column we have to change our thinking a bit. It helps to
listen to this next sentence understanding that it might not mean what you think
it means when you first hear it; in fact, if you think it sounds bad, it
definitely doesn’t mean what you think it means.

In the next column they’re going to write down what they did to put themself in
a position to be hurt or get resentful. If they think this is where they write
down all the bad nasty stuff, ask them to think again. It turns out that no
matter what someone does to us, any angry feelings we have come from inside us.
That’s a pretty different way of thinking than they learned growing up in our
society. Before coming to treatment, they were pretty sure that other people
could make us angry. Now we’re asking them to look at it a bit differently: that
other people acted, and that we had done something as well that made us
vulnerable to being angry about the other person’s action. It’s an important
distinction because it turns out that it isn’t being harmed that drives down our
dopamine tone, it’s being disturbed about it. So if the patient can actually do
something that changes that outcome, even though they can do nothing about the
other person’s behavior, they have a chance to live without this illness
affecting everything they do.

This can often take a lot of getting used to. Some people, when they hear this,
think that we’re saying they are to blame for the other person’s action. That’s
not what we’re saying. Some people think we’re saying that they are to blame for
the other person’s hurting them. That’s not what we’re saying. What we’re saying
is that the other person’s action, while hurtful to us, is insufficient to take
away our happiness. Let’s face it, if it were up to the other person how we
feel, he have no chance for happiness. So this new way of thinking is actually
very good news. We have a way to have our happiness even if we can’t change
other people’s actions (and we can’t).

So what do they write in this fourth column? Examples might include: “I looked
to others to validate my self-esteem,” “I thought I could only be happy if I was
married,” and “I was in a hurry and felt like I had to get there in time or I
was a failure.” We’re not necessarily talking about us having done anything to
cause the other person’s action (though that may have occurred in some cases),
we’re talking about what we did to put ourselves in a position to be hurt. This
may represent a new way of thinking, but a very helpful one and one worth
learning how to master. We go down the fourth column one line at a time as we
did for the other columns and don’t move to the fifth column until we’re
finished the fourth.

So in the fifth column we only have to add one thing and by the time we get
there it will be pretty easy. We ask the patient to write down what part of
their character or personality it is that causes them to act in the ways they
wrote down in column four. We’re not saying it’s a bad part of their character.
We’re not saying we want to change it. We’re only asking them to take an
inventory and be honest with themselves about what part of their personality
leads to those actions. It turns out that a lack of honesty about ourselves
generates shame, and we know that lowers dopamine tone in the reward part of our
brain. As we get more honest with ourselves we will feel better. They go down
the fifth column just listing what it is about themselves that causes the
behavior. Examples might include: “I don’t think I’m worthwhile,” “I don’t trust
a higher power,” and “I need to be in charge.”

So that’s it, the fourth step. You can get your patient through it and they
didn’t have to write down a list of nasty terrible stuff. They can do it without
ripping their hearts out. Now they’re ready for step five. Just like step four,
it’s not as bad as they think.

 
### Step Five

>“Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact nature of our wrongs”

Actually doing step five is the easy part. They just read it to themselves,
whatever they see as their higher power, and another living human being. The
hardest part seems to be, picking that human being.  Many people feel it should
be their sponsor, and, generally, we agree. However, it could be their counselor,
a clergy member, or anyone else who they trust and who will understand what
they’re doing. It’s best if it’s NOT YOU. You are in a special role and it takes
a great deal of experience in both recovery and medicine to balance the roles.
We can’t be patients’ sponsors. It’s also best if it’s not a member of their
family. It’s not a good idea to tell a family member about your feeling about
them or other family members’ in a setting like a fifth step, and it’s not good
for you to leave those things out of your step-work either.

The biggest problem with step five is how it looms large in some people’s minds
and gets them to censor their fourth step. Tell them not to worry about five
when they’re doing four. They’re just writing down for themself at that point.
They can decide later if you’re willing to work step five.

One other thing to mention here is another reason why people are sure that they
can’t do a fifth step. Most people have the thought that there is something so
terrible in their fourth step that, when hearing their fifth step, their sponsor
will run screaming from the room never to be seen again. That’s a pretty common
fear, but we’ve seen thousands of people do this step, and it’s never happened
yet. Let them know that.

 
### Step Six

>“Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character”

<ins>Alcoholics Anonymous</ins> goes to great length to explain steps four and five;
a whole chapter gets written on step twelve; one could consider chapters 1-4 to
be about the first three steps alone. Steps six and seven get one paragraph
each. So your patients may think they aren’t important. They are.

Step six is where people decide to change. They’ve taken a look at themselves in
four and five. They’ve even told someone else and not died of shame. Immediately
after that they are in a position to change that may be unique in their lives.
So their instructions are to go immediately after step five and sit quietly with
what they’ve discovered about themselves. Do they want to stay this way?

I’ve found it useful to get patients to make lists of pro’s and con’s about what
they discover in their fourth step. For instance let’s say they’ve found that
they are controlling of other people because they are afraid of other people’s
thoughts about them. So I’d ask them to take a piece of paper, write at the top
“I am afraid of what other people think,” and then make two columns: pro’s and
con’s. There may be some pro’s, but there will usually be more con’s. It’s a
useful way to motivate actual change.

Another point to make here is that the patient isn’t deciding to change himself
or herself here. They are only finding the willingness to change.

Remember that in our biological understanding of the illness, almost everything
about these “defects of character” will be things we could use as drugs before
we were old enough to get outside rewards. In the ADAM Way, these are early
drugs, and so this step and the next are about becoming willing to abstain from
their use and to practice abstinence from their use. This means that these steps
are just a repeat of what the patient has already done to get here in the first
place. 


### Step Seven

>“Humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings”

This one looks real easy. “Ok, God, I’m sure I don’t want to be selfish anymore.
Take it away!” If only it worked like that.

Here is where a knowledgeable addiction medicine physician can be very helpful.
We can remind the patient that the universe doesn’t generally provide help with
what we can do, only with what we can’t. We agree that the person can’t just
change himself or herself, but we can suggest to them that they can practice how
to be after they have the shortcoming removed.

So if God hasn’t swung the lightning bolt and made them unselfish, they could,
while waiting, practice being unselfish so they’ll be ready. This is a good
cognitive tool to move behavioral change while still not disrupting the
patient’s spiritual practice or step work. 


### Step Eight

>“Made a list of all persons we had harmed and became willing to make amends to them all”

This just frankly scares people. Of course we could fall back on the old
recovery joke, “Don’t worry about 8. It’s just a list. It’s 9 that will kill
you.”

But that won’t really help with our purpose of helping the patient move through
these steps. I think we should take down the poster on the wall in
the group room. People see these steps out of context, and they can get scared
away. So we have to find a way for people to hear about these steps in advance
and still stay to do them. If they don’t do them they’ll never resolve the shame
that drives down their dopamine receptor density.

So, focusing on being addiction medicine physicians, what can we tell people
about step eight? We can tell them that their brain knows what they’ve done. We
can tell them step eight is a written inventory of relationships in their lives
that they don’t feel completely comfortable with. We can tell them that this
discomfort will follow them and decrease dopamine receptor density unless they
are taken care of. We can tell them that this step and the next are important to
change their brains.

There’s no one else in the patient’s life that will approach step 8 this way.
They have a sponsor; they have a counselor; they have a family. You are their
only shot at hearing the 8th step from a doctor’s point of view. By giving them
the biological perspective you’re telling them something they can only hear from
you. 


### Step Nine

>“Made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to do so would injure them or others”

Personally, I don’t generally take people off of dopamine raising medications
until they have done significant work in step nine. This is because this step
relieves shame. They experience of the people who wrote <ins>Alcoholics Anonymous</ins> was
that they we’re relieved of their chronic low dopamine tone before they were
“half-way done” with step nine. So the patient doesn’t have to be finished step
nine, just well enough into it to have noticed a change.

Again, you are the only one who can give them the perspective you can. Others
will be telling them they are working this step to get right with those around
them; others will be telling them it’s to get closer to God; others will tell
them it’s so they can sit still in their own skin. You’re the only one that can
explain the exact nature of the biological change and how it counters the
primary symptoms of the illness. This is not only important for getting people
through the steps, but also to educate them on the causes of symptoms when they
return. Remember, this is a chronic disease. We give the patient anticipatory
guidance even when we don’t say it’s anticipatory. 


### Step Ten

>“Continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong promptly admitted it.”

The counselors should be well versed in teaching the patients how to do a
step 4-9 spot check inventory. Step Ten is largely just that. What they need to
hear from you is that this continual day-to-day inventory process is a great way
to “return to zero.” Almost all of them can identify with the little problems of
each day starting to build on top of each other until they are so big there’s
nothing else to do but use. It will help them to hear that this is not merely a
psychological problem, but a biological one. It will help them to hear that by
working spot check inventories whenever they are disturbed that they will be
keeping their brain reset to the zero point.

The spot check inventory is a fine thing for any of us to get good at, and good
at teaching to others. I’m going to include it here so that you can become
familiar with it.


#### Guide to Your Spot-check Inventory

For most people in recovery, the day is filled with events that bring up
anger, fear, or shame. If left to fester, these emotions can create resentment,
which is the number one killer of people in recovery. A spot-check inventory
done immediately upon noticing these feelings is a great way to prevent these
from festering.

A spot-check inventory is a quick rundown of steps 4 through 9 regarding a small
upheaval in our emotions during the day. Before we get into the “how to” part,
let’s take a look at where the idea of a spot-check inventory comes from. This
is excerpted from the AA 12 and 12.

>“A spot-check inventory taken in the midst of such disturbances can be of very great help in quieting stormy emotions. Today’s spot-check finds its chief application to situations which arise in each day’s march. The consideration of long-standing difficulties had better be postponed, when possible, to times deliberately set aside for that purpose. The quick inventory is aimed at our daily ups and downs, especially those where people or new events throw us off balance and tempt us to make mistakes.”

This sounds a lot like step 10, doesn’t it? Here’s an excerpt regarding step 10
from <ins>Alcoholics Anonymous</ins>.

>“It should continue for our lifetime. Continue to watch for selfishness, dishonesty, resentment and fear. When these crop up, we ask God at once to remove them. We discuss them with someone immediately and make amends quickly if we have harmed anyone.”

“Wait,” you say. “How can I be doing step 10 in a spot-check inventory when I
haven’t even finished step 4?” Well, my experience is that without the spot-
check inventory as a tool, many people won’t make it long enough to finish step
4. That’s why we’re including teaching it as a tool in primary treatment. Anyone
can use a spot-check inventory. Here’s what you do.

As soon as you figure out that you’re upset by any emotion, turn it over to your
higher power. If that works, great, you’re done. If it doesn’t, move on to the
spot-check inventory. If turning it over worked and it comes back later, move on
to the spot-check inventory.

#### The Spot-check

First, a word about order. You’d think that a spot-check is steps 4 through 9,
right? Well it is, but not in that order. Because a spot-check is designed to be
done quickly with practice we won’t interrupt the process with a step 5 phone
call until near the end. So we’ll do steps, 4,6,7,8,5,9.

#### Four

Just as in the Big Book, we’re going to make a grid, but in this case there will
only be one or two lines because this is a spot-check inventory.

I’m mad at	Because they	It affected my	What I did	Why I do this


The first column usually needs no explanation; we put in it the name of the
person at whom we’re angry or of whom we’re scared. Just whomever you’re upset
at or with. The second column is also easy. We just write what they did: “cut in
front of me in traffic,” “laughed at me,” etc.

The third column is a little different. We want to be clear about what this
other person’s action affected in us. Through a lot of practice over the years,
people have found that there are four big things that almost everything else can
get collapsed into. It’s helpful if you can stick to these four things that can
be affected by others: my security, my personal relations, my ambitions, my
self-esteem. Security includes both physical and financial security. Ambition
includes anything you had planned on accomplishing. Personal relations include any
relationship you have with anyone else (including sex), and self esteem is how you feel about
yourself.

The fourth column also takes some explaining because many people think it means,
“What I did to cause the other guy to hurt me.” But that’s not what the fourth
column is at all. The fourth column refers to what we did to put ourselves in a
position to be hurt, not what we did to cause the other person’s action. Very
often we are upset by the action of others when we had no role at all in
triggering their behavior. The fourth step still gives us a tool to deal with
our feelings, because we still have a role in producing the upset even if we
didn’t produce the offender's behavior. An example of this is often necessary. Let’s say
someone cuts in front of you in traffic. You didn’t make him do it, but you’re
angry about it. What did you do to put yourself in a position to be hurt? Things
like this often come up and such answers as “I expect others to respect me in
order for me to respect myself” or “I had the expectation of getting there on
time” go well in this column.

The fifth column should be titled, “What’s true about me that I do these things”
but it wouldn’t fit so I just wrote, “Why I do this.” Here is where we look at
why we put ourselves in a position to be hurt. For instance we might have in our
fifth column following the two fourth column examples above, “I don’t have a
good enough relationship with my higher power to feel truly equal to others” or
“I don’t trust my higher power and have to have my day all planned out so that
I’m in charge.”

#### Six

Skipping the fifth step for just a bit, we look at our fifth column and ask
ourselves do we want to stay this way. Do we want to continue to have an
insufficient relationship with our higher power? Do we want to continue to
distrust our higher power? Do we want to continue to be selfish? Afraid?
Whatever it is we found in the fifth column?

It’s not enough to just say, “Of course we want to change.” We really have to look at it. 
These old truths about ourselves are usually our first drugs. They were sources of 
dopamine often before we could speak. We’ve been using them so long we don’t even 
realize we could be another way. We need to give this some thought. Just a minute 
or two will do.

#### Seven

Once we’ve determined that this is not something we’d like to keep, we humbly
ask our higher power to remove it from us. This is done very quickly once we’ve
made the decision.

#### Eight

During the disturbance, did we do anything to hurt anyone else? Even someone we
don’t know or could never apologize to. We make a list in our heads, and now
it’s time to call our sponsor.

#### Five

So we’re calling our sponsor to do step 5 but also so that we can check out what
amends we should make in step nine. The call can be quick or not depending on
what we have to talk about. It might go something like this. “I was driving to
work and this guy cut in front of me and made me miss the green light and I was
late for work. It affected my self-esteem, my security, and my ambitions. What I
did was leave home later than usual but also I put myself in a position to have
my self esteem affected because I had the expectation of everyone else taking
care of me. I put myself in a position to be harmed also by having expectations
of how things will work out. What’s true about me that I do these things is that
I was selfish and took extra time for myself rather than leave on time for work,
I don’t love myself or respect myself enough and need to get esteem from others,
and I don’t trust my higher power and keep thinking I have to make plans to run
my life. I’ve thought about this and I don’t want to run things anymore. I don’t
want to not trust my higher power. I don’t want to be selfish anymore. I’ve
asked my higher power to take these things away from me. When the guy pulled in
front of my I slammed on my horn and shot him the bird. I don’t know who he was
and can’t call and make amends but I want to make the amends to me that I won’t
shoot the bird at anyone in traffic again. What do you think?”

#### Nine

If our sponsor approves our ninth step intentions we set about them as quickly
as we can without doing more damage. We don’t take the day off of work and leave
our boss hanging in order to clear our heads. We don’t ignore the need to pick
up our kids from school in order to make these amends. But we do them as quickly
as we can.

#### Summary

At first it may take several minutes to do a spot-check inventory. The more we
practice the faster we’ll get. The more we do, the easier life becomes. Rather
than letting things build up and build up during the day, we reset to zero all
day long with a simple specific procedure that works.


### Step Eleven

>“Sought through prayer and mediation to improve our conscious contact with God as we understood Him, praying only for knowledge of His will for us and the power to carry that out”

Prayer and meditation, two things most doctors don’t talk about, and two things
most Americans don’t want to hear about from their doctors. If your patient is
ready for a prayer life or to begin a meditative practice, there’s little
they’ll need from you, so I’ll concentrate on the patient who isn’t ready.

Again, here you can be of unique service. There will be many people extolling
the spiritual benefits of prayer and meditation. It’s the last thing in the
world people expect from their doctor. And if you extol the spiritual benefits
too, you’ll be just a doctor who has a spiritual life like those other people
who are trying to get the patient to do these things. They won’t have any reason
to listen to you any more than they have to listen to those others whose counsel
did not work.

You, however, have a different tack you can take. You can explain the brain
processes to them. You can discuss theta waves in the pre-frontal cortex. You
can explain the holistic nature of decision making. You can demystify and
strengthen a patient’s confidence that prayer and meditation will improve their
conscious contact with their own intuitive understanding of how the universe
works, that they’re lives will be easier and fuller without the conflict of
constantly being out of sync with that understanding. Regardless of your own
spiritual path or religious beliefs, try to keep your explanations on a
scientific footing. Many people keep the scientific “get of out jail free” card
in their back pocket for when they decide to blow off all this spiritual stuff.
You’re scientific explanations may be the thing that will keep them in recovery
when that day comes. 


### Step Twelve

>“Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of these steps, we tried to carry this message to alcoholics and to practice these principles in all our affairs”

So if people feel better with more dopamine receptors, and feeling less than and
isolation both decrease dopamine receptors, then it follows that anyone who
wants to feel good all the time should avoid isolation and feeling less than. Is
there anything more protective against those than helping someone else? The act
of helping is a behavioral signal to the self that “I’m fine,” that I have
enough to give, the very antithesis of less than. The act of helping others is
usually done in their presence, which breaks down isolation.

By this time, the patient is generally interested in engaging in recovery and
not likely to need much in the way of prompting. However, remember that this is
a chronic illness. They are also likely to believe they have had a permanent
change, and this is a good time to be reminded of the biological nature of the
illness and of recovery. Nothing’s really changed. The illness is still there.
What’s been discovered is a way to relieve the symptoms on a daily basis if
followed. If not followed, it does as much good as medication left in the
bottle. It was Santayana who said:
> “Repetition is the only form of permanence that Nature can achieve.”


 
