










<center><h2>Special Topics - Diagnosis</h2></center>
 
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

### PTSD

Co-morbidity with PTSD is as common as PTSD. First, we’ll discuss PTSD and then
the comorbidity with addiction.

PTSD has been with humanity since the dawn of time, but no diagnosis has been
forgotten more over the course of history, except, perhaps, addiction. In the
modern European-American medical tradition Pierre Janet, a contemporary of
Freud’s, first brought to light trauma as the etiology of pathology. Janet did
his work in a public hospital in Paris among the poor and those who tended to
them. Both Freud and Janet worked with “hysterical” patients that we would term
today has having dissociation or as conversion disorders. Freud postulated
fantasy as a primary cause of hysteria, while Janet posited that it was trauma.
As Janet’s patients had less in common with the journalists and scientific
correspondents of the day than did Freud’s, it was Janet’s work that tended to
be forgotten.

The effect of trauma on pathology remained forgotten, except for a brief period
following WWI, until well after WWII. From 1945, when several prominent
psychiatrists left military service, to the 1970’s, when America left Vietnam, a
great deal had to be forgotten and relearned. This period culminated in the DSM
diagnosis of PTSD.

When it was included in DSM-III, it was thought that PTSD was purely related to
the extent of trauma that the person received. That is, the greater the trauma
the more the chance of having PTSD. While the relationship is true at both the
individual and group level, it is not the only factor as it was once thought to
be.  Contemporary research has shown that acute stress response symptoms are
normal and ubiquitous in humans exposed to traumatic stress. Rather than seeing
the paradigm as trauma causes PTSD, the modern view is that trauma causes acute
stress response which normally resolves in less than a month, and there are
separate factors that lead to the continuation of the stress response that led
to the chronic condition of PTSD.

DSM divides the criteria for PTSD into three fields that are neurobiologically
distinct: arousal, avoidance, re-experiencing. Interestingly, they are listed
here in the time sequence in which they most commonly occur, while in DSM they
are in reverse order making the re-experiencing the most prominent.

There is, in trauma, an immediate non-controllable fight or flight response,
which is one in which arousing neurotransmitters are released in abundance. The
human body is wonderfully adapted for an acute rise in these arousal signals and
a rapid diminution. When that diminution does not occur, a condition of
chronicity can develop in which the state of heightened arousal can be replaced
by a state of exhaustion and deficiency of those same systems; alternately the
states may alternate or co-exist rather than follow sequentially. The primary
arousal mechanism is one of norepinephrine release from the Locus Ceruleus.

Just as the reward system is designed to attract the individual to things which
have proven to be rewarding, the emotional memories centers can also dissuade
one from approaching that which is known to be noxious. So, avoidance can
naturally follow a negative arousal state.  This avoidance is both internal
(dissociation) and behavioral (isolation). The dissociative response is a
primary mechanism by which individuals can distance themselves from a
threatening emotion. The biology of the amygdala, the seat of emotional memory,
is thought to be greatly involved. This dissociative response is usually seen
earlier than the isolation response, which often follows re-experiencing.

Re-experiencing exists primarily as a breakdown of dissociative defense. The
term flashback, having become ubiquitous in our society, is the most commonly
seen form of re-experiencing. Flashbacks can best be understood via the BASK
model. In the model, B stands for behavior, A for affect, S for sensation, and
K for knowledge. The model states that dissociated memory can return in one or
more of these forms. For instance, a rape victim may suddenly feel pain in the
vaginal area without experiencing the memory of being raped. When seen in light
of the BASK model, flashbacks are seen as generally small easy to handle
phenomena which can be normalized with moderate effort. Just as the amygdala is
involved in dissociation so is it in the flashback, which is the failure of
dissociation. So not all flashbacks have to lead to a person diving under his
kitchen table screaming, “Incoming.” In fact, most don’t include the knowledge
component that allows the patient to even recognize the event as a flashback.

It might be good to mention here, as an aside, a particular type of
re-experiencing that both Freud and Janet tried hard to explain. That is the
frequent attempt by trauma patients to enter situations in which reminders of
the trauma or even new traumatic experiences can bring about the failure of the
dissociative defense. When trauma is re-experienced the gluamaturgic surge from
the amygdala that is familiar to all addiction doctors occurs which can result
in a surge of dopamine at the Nucleus Accumbens. Even if not pleasurable, the
midbrain will code this as a salient reward, especially in light of depleted
dopamine stores. Re-experiencing trauma can be a drug.

Finally, the person may begin to isolate in order to stop unexplained and
uncontrolled phenomena. This isolation can be accompanied by chemical attempts
`at isolation by using sedative hypnotics to the point of oblivion.

Diagnostic Implications – Patients who are Type I may present as Type II
because of dopamine exhaustion in chronic trauma syndromes. Alternately
patients who are genetically Type II may present as Type I if early in the
trauma or if frequent re-experiencing is present.

Treatment Implications – The addicted patient with PTSD may have symptoms that
respond to addiction treatment, or they may have symptoms that will be made
worse by normal addiction medication. If the latter is the case, it is necessary
to treat the PTSD symptoms first. For instance, a genetically Type I patient
who presents with addiction after years of using sedatives to dull arousal is
now using stimulants because of long-term depletion. If we were to raise her
dopamine tone first, she would likely respond with a worsening of her
re-experiencing symptoms and increase in her arousal symptoms. We can
prophylactically treat to prevent this response.

Good treatments for arousal and re-experiencing include the agents that
decrease norepinephrine tone. Especially if sleep is a problem, it is important
to remember that the patient doesn’t have a sleep problem; they have PTSD and
hyper-arousal 24 hours a day that may only be expressing itself when they try to
sleep. Re-experiencing sometimes responds to glutamaturgic blockers. Repetitive
behaviors can often be stopped with naltrexone or buprenorphine if indicated.

It is important to note that the arousal and re-experiencing symptoms respond to
treatment immediately as do addiction symptoms. This is not major depression and
doesn’t require 6 weeks of waiting regardless of the class of medications we use.
We would follow the PTSD patient just as closely as any other addiction patient
and only be satisfied with the treatment that suppressed symptoms enough for
more focused addiction treatment to continue.

Of particular interest is the interaction of depressive symptoms and PTSD. There
are two causes and two different affective correlates in trauma patients. First
there is the person who is affectively deficient because of a state of
exhaustion. This can be quickly reversed with proper treatment. Second is the
case of those who have decreased white matter from a discontinuation of
neurogenesis caused by the chronic activation of cortisol receptors. This latter
process, best termed Major Depression, while it can be symptomatically treated
quickly, will take weeks to respond anatomically.
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
 
### Major Depression

The illness of biological major depression is distinct from the DSM set of
symptoms that are over inclusive. In real major depression there is a decrease
in white matter and an actual shrinkage of the brain. The normal brain has
about 10,000 interconnections to each of its 100 billion neurons. With a chronic
stress situation, increased cortisol can decrease or stop production of brain
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and a resulting pruning back of neuronal
interconnectedness.

This syndrome of brain shrinkage, and this syndrome alone, is the syndrome that
takes 6 to 8 weeks to respond to medical treatment. This is because the neuron
takes time to grow back. Those syndromes that are not anatomically based, but
rather based on chemical deficit, will reverse immediately on the correct
treatment being applied.

All medications that are labeled as anti-depressants block the cortisol receptor
independent of what monoamines they affect. In addition, there are several
medications that don’t affect monoamines at all but have a robust anti-
depressant response. They are generally not used as anti-depressants because of
their lack of side effects and resulting lack of immediate symptom relief. This
latter group includes Buspar and several anti-epileptic medications as well as
lithium.
 <div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>
